how do I do this? He says, you just call a Colonel, I
believe that fellow's name was, yeah, Colonel
Green in the Pentagon and gave me the phone number
and just tell him what your name is, what your
present duty is, where you're stationed, and that
you want to join the American Volunteer Group
under General Claire Chanel. Well, under Chanel.
So,
next morning I called, well, in the night I started
talking to a couple of friends of mine who had gone
over to California from Florida, same base, you
know, two of my flying buddies, Jim Cross and
George Burgard. They were much younger in the Air
Force than I did. As a matter of fact, didn't
practically have a flying school. And they liked
the idea. Dave wanted to go, and I said, well, when I
call, I'll mention his name. He said, okay. And I
was told, boy, it happens like that when you call.
So I called this Colonel Green, talked to his
secretary, gave him a name, serial number, and all
that type of stuff. And that evening, I gave him the
name of this Jim, George, Burgoyne Jim Cross. That
evening, there was a wire received from
headquarters. An old colonel, he was a major then,
Dias, D-I-A-Z, I'll never forget it. He called me
in, and he said, Bob, what in the hell is this wire
I've got? He says, I'm giving instruction to
release you from active duty and reserve duty
immediately, and here's your order sending you to
your home for subsequent release to go on another
mission. He said, what the hell is this all about?
So I told him. Boy, he was madder than hell. He said,
well, why don't you talk about it? I said, well, I
didn't have a chance. It was one of those things
that came up. He was mad to lose you. Oh, yeah. One of
his key men. Same way as them. They had orders, too.
Yeah, they got orders, too. Matter of fact, the
same wire had all three names. But I was a flight
leader, so that's what he called me. But he
eventually understood and didn't hold anything.
It took about, well, I was gone in about 48 hours. So
you were out in L.A. at this time. And they paid my
way home with dollars. They did. And I was given
instructions, subsequent instructions on
telephone from Colonel Green's office. I guess
Colonel Green was a contact point. I had the
project in the munitions building. Sure. And I was
just told to go home and stay there until they
contacted me. They figured I'd be around.
And so I went home, and got a telephone call to
report to San Francisco on September the 21st,
1941. And that was about two weeks off. And they
sent me an airline ticket, and I packed up my stuff
and went to San Francisco. And I forget what hotel.
buddies to be and a lot of other guys. As a matter of
fact, there was about thirty-five of us on this
contingent. There had already been two
contingents shipped over. And we were to go over on
the Bosch Fontaine, a Dutch motor ship, to
Rangoon, Burma by various different means. It was
a freighter? No, it was a—well, it was a—they call
it a motorboat because it was propelled
steamship, really. Well, it wasn't steam, it was
oil propelled. Diesel. Diesel, yeah. But they
call it the USS Boche Fontaine. It's the bottom of
the ocean now, by the way. Some of the Japanese
subsequently. It was quite a motor ship. It was
diesel powered. And it was strictly passenger,
some freight. They carried freight. Well, I say
it's a combination. And about 35 of us guys Two
contingents, as I said, had already gone over, and
we were to go to Tongu, Burma, right in the central
part of Burma, by way of Rangoon. And it was going to
take us, but it so turned out we sailed on the 25th of
September of 1941, and we docked at Rangoon
October the 12th. Wow, that's a long time. That
long. We went to Hawaii, and then from Hawaii we
sailed due south for a long, long time. And I said,
well, I found out even aboard ship that we were
boarding the Japanese shipping lane for obvious
reasons. This was a Dutch, you know. Sure. This
goes back to, I think, I initially made the comment
to you. I think it was Christmas Island we sailed
right by. We saw it one day. But boy, it seemed like
we were on that boat forever from Honolulu to
Surabaya, Java. That was the first stop. Well, we
picked up a pilot. off of Sydney, right here. No,
Townsville. Picked up a poly right off
Townsville, Australia, and we came on back down
and sailed and came into Surabaya, Java. And it was
there, Surabaya is quite a Dutch port, and we could
see fortifications being put in then.
against the Japanese.
My passport, I was a clerk. Is that what it said on
it? I had to sever. As a matter of fact, I even had to
resign my reserve commission. Oh, okay. I wanted
to know about that. What happened as far as the U.S.
military is concerned? Because you were really
getting out of the service. As a matter of fact, I
was told through this Colonel Green's office that
when you come back,
But would you lose time? No. How did that work?
Would you lose time and grade? I had to get out. I had
to resign from the service. And he gave me an
honorable discharge. And I also had to resign my
reserve commission, which was sort of an unusual
thing. I had to reserve all relations with the U.S.
military. And upon return, I would be reinstated
with my reserve commission, and it was debatable
for longevity purpose of entity pay whether that
one year would be held out or not. But
subsequently, I was found out that they did not
give me credit for that one year of service on my,
figured my longevity pay. But my commission was
dated back The day I got out of the service was
actually, it was dated back to
September the 20th, sometime in September. When I
re-entered the service on October the 9th, I
think, 1942, no, 43,
when I got back home. 41, no wait, 42.
My reserve commission was dated back to make it
continuous, but my active duty service was picked
up the day I returned to the military, so it got me
here. And I went back, by the way, as second
lieutenant. One week later, I was promoted to
captain. Another week, I was promoted to major.
The following week, I was promoted to lieutenant
colonel. It was that understanding when I went
back to the service. Well, what do you mean that?
Well, I'm getting way ahead of myself. This is when
I got out of the Flying Tiger and came back home.
They tried to induct us over there, you know. No. To
stay right on the job. But the way they were doing
it. Well, we'll get to that. Let's get to that. But
now let's go. I just wanted to find out the legality
of how the service would allow one of their own
pilots to become a volunteer. And then what would
happen? to have a military career. Well, I dare say
all of this was foreseen by the administration
from the president on down. Look, we know we're
going to be in a war with the Japanese. I've heard
subsequently through political channels,
diplomatic channels, subsequently in Russia,
you know, amongst discussion with ambassadors
and all, for instance Harriman, that Roosevelt
supposedly made the comment that One of the
greatest solutions to one of the most difficult
problems he ever had was when the Japanese bombed
Pearl Harbor. It made it simple for him. He just
declared war on them. And he knew all along,
eventually, he was going to be confirmed with the
task of declaring war against Japan. But this made
it simple. I don't know how true that is. And I would
be a bit surprised if he made that step. Anyway.
So you got? You were in the Far East. They knew
they'd eventually take us over as part of the Air
Forces of, let's say, the Far East. They knew
they'd take us back. And was the understanding
that you could sign up for as many one-year tours of
duties with Chenault and Spalding Tigers as you
wanted? Yeah, but the initial thing was for one
year. The contract was for one year, and then if we
continued on, you could sign up for another year.
Your pay was a lot better. Oh, I was getting about,
if I remember correctly, I was doing, as a second
lieutenant in the Air Force, I think I was doing
$100,000. You were a first lieutenant now. That's
why I was doing $162 a month. $162 as a first
lieutenant? Versus $600 a month. Plus $500 for the
airplane. Plus all the expenses. I didn't have to
pay any money for any food or lodging. And, of
course, I was being trained in combat real estate.
What was it like, and where were you sent? What base
did you finally end up at? The base, the initial
training base, in the middle of, well, actually
the first continued arrived in June of 1942 at
Tongu, Burma, T-O-U-N-G-O-O, right in the middle
of the center of Burma at an RAF.
They had the major control and influence in Burma.
As a matter of fact, they had- They were the British
Empire. Right, that's right. And they had three or
four air bases on them, one of which was Tangu. Just
a little tarmac strip, tarmac, British, is a
mechanized strip about 2,000 feet long with a one
hanger. That was their training base. Somehow or
other, through Lend-Lease, and I don't know the
story of this, but the Chinese with the British
agreed to let Chenault use this base in Burma to
train the American Volunteer Group. That's what
it was called, American Volunteer Group. We
didn't even know what Flying Tiger was at that
time. And I think he was given a year to train the
group and then move it up to China. after we were
trained. He wanted freedom to train. See, bases in
China were being bombed at that time. So he wanted
freedom to train us. But one of the stipulations
was, and the freedom he was given, he chose the most
experienced and capable pilots he could get. He'd
ask for the best. He got the cream of crop of
maintenance people, armorers, communications
people, all the logistical support types,
airmen, Many of the guys were master sergeants of
that type. Their pay was ordinarily increased.
And nine-tenths of the guys were fighter pilots.
The Navy, the Army, the Army Air Corps, and the
Marine Corps. I think there were four Marine
Corps. All of them were. Well, some of the guys in
the Navy were bomber or attack pilots. And I was
accepted.
When Ault had it planned at that time, he had
dreamed of really studying the entire Air Force
and getting some bombers. Ultimately, when he had
the 14th Air Force inducted into the service of the
general, the United States Air Force, then he did
get some bombers over there. And they visualized
me being head of the bombing section when they got
some B-17s. And, boy, I dreamed of that. But in the
meantime, I was getting back fighters, P-40s. I'd
never flown a P-40 in my life. OK. How about the
training? So we arrived at Tongu by train from
Rangoon, and some of the boys had been there
already, met us, took us out, put us up in the
barracks, and we started our training. How many
were you? The initial plan, ultimate plan, was for
100 pilots with 100 airplanes with a small staff
for the group under Chenault himself, probably
15, 20 staff people. and about 250 officers and
officer types and airman types. Total of about 275
in the entire group. That's 275 Americans. This is
tantamount, this would be tantamount to a wing, a
fighter wing in the United States Air Force, which
on an ordinary base is around 4,100 people. But,
now you see, we would just be the tactical outfit
that would fly up to China and be imposed complete
logistical organization of the Chinese Air
Force, where they provided the messing, the fifth
echelon maintenance and supply, and all of that
stuff. So was Chenault there when you arrived?
Chenault was already in China. Was he training you
down there? Oh, yeah. His main office was in China,
Kunming, China. We arrived, and well, since June,
when the first contingent arrived, Tom Goo, he'd
been spending most of his time at Tom Goo, you know,
personally, with a few of his staff supervising
the training. And as he received us, you know, he
gleaned over our records and so forth, and picked
the better qualified people for the certain key
staff, and then as he learned more about certain
people, you know, maybe this guy was more of a
communicator than he was a pilot, he may have
pulled him, put him in the communication. key
staff members, like a material man. One guy living
out here in Abilene, Texas right now, Pepe Paxton,
he turned out to be, well, he had an accounting
degree and he was quite a financial type of guy, and
he wasn't a pilot at all, to tell you the truth about
it. And he was a little bit older than the rest of us,
so he made him his finance officer, that type of
stuff. So we had a going organization. How good was
the training? The training was, the training per
se, I'd say was medium to good. It wasn't the best in
the world because I'd say 98% of the pilots that
came over had never flown a P-40 before. There'd
only been one or two, I think, guys that had flown a
P-40 before out of the airport. Langley Field had
just gotten some P-40s, I think. And the rest of us
were from other types of airplanes. The few who
would talk, then they taught others, and they
taught others. So the training really wasn't a big
problem. We were elite. We were already trained
people. For instance, I was a bomber pilot. You
were getting used to the P-40. That's right. Being
indoctrinated into, in other words, I was being
re-equipped with a new airplane. I had one in mind,
too. So you go on just training flights? Training
flights, get indoctrinated, and... I had to rush
through things. Sure. How long did you train?
Well, if I remember correctly, I think I had my
first flight about the first of November. I had
about twelve hours in the P-40 on December 7th,
when Warbrook moved. But I had already been on
several, oh, many combat missions where doing
actual, you know, engaging in aerial combat
Matter of fact, I was, for the latter part of
November, I was teaching some newcomers fighter
tactics and P-40s. I'd been on gunnery missions.
I'd never flown a gunnery mission, air-to-air
gunnery mission. My first mission was against
Japanese bomber on December the 18th. But I had
done ground gunnery with a P-40. I hadn't gotten to
the point where I did air-to-air gunnery, as a
matter of fact. What did you think of the P-40? I
loved it. As a matter of fact, first thing, I was
back in the fighter. And it was an inline engine,
you know, and looked sleek, powerful. You could
turn a vertical dive and just go all out and never
worry about anything coming loose. It'd
terminate around 450-something like that miles
an hour and hold together. How could you compare
it, or would you compare it with the Japanese
airplanes? Well, that's what I'll get into, if
it's okay. Yeah, I'd like to do that. I didn't meet a
Japanese zero until Van Goon in February. But I had
utmost confidence in it. And the key thing,
though, was the knowledge that Chenault had of
Japanese zeros and Japanese tactics as a result of
being in China so long. He personally taught the
first guy that came over to the first contingent,
and then, you know, he used them to teach us. But
even at times, he'd come in and give us talk.
personal talks. And we had pictures of the Zeros,
and then the old man here, his personal
experience. We were completely confident of what
he was telling us. And we were given, you know, he
was the master of the flying in pairs, too. He
developed those tactics in the United States Air
Force. He's a master of that right now throughout
the entire Air Force of the world. always be at
least two planes together. And
he knew the characteristics, flat
characteristics of a P-40 compared to Zero. Zero
is an extremely maneuverable aircraft, very
light. The first one may have had no armor,
protective armor in them at all. And it had two
7.2 caliber guns in them, a little bit less than a
.30 caliber. We had two, we had four .30 calibers
and a wing root of the P-40B, the first one we had,
and two .50 calibers and a fuselage shooting
through the propeller. And we tried to cock the .50
calibers in a cockpit yourself, just manually.
You know, the butt of the gun sticking right out in
front of your shoulder. Whereas the the 430s and
the wings, you cocked and primed with hydraulic
buttons.
Firepower, then. Oh, yeah. Oh, we had superior
firepower. We had superior speed, definitely in a
dive. What about flat out? Flat out at altitude, we
were just about equal. As a matter of fact, at
extreme altitudes, 0 to 21,000 feet, we were sort
of at a disadvantage of zero. We were a little bit
faster. But in a dive, the zero would have a
terminal dive that was slower than us. We were out
diving. But we wouldn't dare turn with it. So we
were given a tactic to use against the zero. That's
what we practiced and trained with. You couldn't
turn as fast as that? Every turn, come in, hit and
run tactics. Hit and run tactics, keep up a high
airspeed, and of course you could come in in the
initial attack with a superior altitude, hit and
break off, then go out, then come back, trying to
reclimb into the altitude. Try to maintain
altitude, though. and stay away from them from the
standpoint of horizontal maneuvering. And if
they do happen to get on your tail, split us out and
go into a high-speed dive to pull away from them.
And that's the way we fought them. And I have nine
and a quarter victories. I'm almost a double ace.
Well, we're going to get to that. We're going to get
to those victories. But I wanted to know now about
when was your training completed? Let's get back
to the narrative. My training wasn't completed.
And many of the pilots in my contingent, as a matter
of fact, I think, if I remember correctly, there
was one or two pilots that had not taken back. Every
pilot, we had about 15. 68 pilots at that time might
continue came over at about the 68th pilot there
was one more contingent the incident was in route
and got just about the wake island on december the
7th and they turned it around saying back home that
would have included the other 32 policies you
would have had your hundred right but they sent
them back home but so we started out with 68 pilots
And at that time, we probably had about 50 of the
airplanes, 55 or maybe 60 of the airplanes, of the
100 P-40. And I had, like I said, I think I had 12
hours. And I have an old Chinese log book that I
still keep. So you had 12 hours of training. 12
hours of NAP-40 total on December the 7th, which
included some gunnery missions. See, I had a total
of about... When was your first mission? You mean
actual combat? Yeah. When were you first sent out
to engage the enemy, if you did or not? On December
the 7th. Of course, we went on December the 7th. We
got the news. Pearl Harbor was hit and all of us were
shocked. Well, we immediately worked all night
long, armed our guns full up. We were ready to go to
work because we thought we were going to be hit four
days over. And we immediately went on alert. In
other words, you were not hit at all, your air
bases? No, no. Even though they were out? Oh, okay.
Oh, they knew exactly what we were doing. Oh, yeah.
Matter of fact, they knew we were polished when we
came through Surabaya. This stuff came out in the
papers, the Japanese in the papers. We know about
the American Volunteer Group that continued
coming through on the way to China, I mean to Burma.
We know where they're based and all, and said, you
know, eventually we'll take care of it. But they
were busy hitting Singapore, Philippines, They
had no respect whatsoever. They didn't even worry
about American volunteers. They figured, you
know, that we were a polyglot mercenary outfit and
that we probably wouldn't be able to find our way
out of a paper bag. We learned this subsequently.
Well, we went on alert, and of course, like I say, we
were expected to be hit, but we They went to some,
you know, Pearl Harbor, all hell broke loose. The
United States was in a war, and then of course we got
in a war against Europe, too. I mean, active power.
Well, the fat was in a fire then, so some high-level
conferences. This pushed up the schedule for
Chenault considerably. And after some
consultations with the British and the Chinese,
Not the American, but the British and Chinese.
Well, I guess America had to be in, because of the
Lend-Lease airplane and all, but to my knowledge,
it was primarily between the British and the
Chinese. One of our squadrons, we had three
squadrons, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Pursuit. One of our
squadrons, I think it was 3rd Squadron, would go
down to Rangoon with the idea of protecting the
port for the Burma Road to push the client into
China. The other two squadrons would immediately
deploy up to Kunming, China, our main base that was
being prepared for us in China, where we were all
supposed to have gone. The whole group should have
gone, planned where. And we were going to go, I
think, planned where in the early part of 1942 we
would have gone to. Is that right here? Yes, yes.
Sorry, our error. Here's Kunming right here. Tom
Boo is right here just south of Young Yim here, and
south of Mandalay, and that's where we were
training here at Rand Goodman. And so you flew up
and over there? Up and over the hump, that's the
north part of the hump. And when did you fly over the
hump? In December, we deployed up to Kunming on the
14th December 1941, and on the 18th of December
1941 was my first taste of combat. Okay, now before
we get into the first taste of combat, tell me about
flying over the hump. Well, on that route from
Canggu
northwest to Kunming, you really don't fly over
the hump. The real hump is between India and China.
And of course, I've flown over that. But you just
have no, in those days, no navigation aids
whatsoever. In our P-40, we had that old
commercial radio set for air-to-air RTT. but we
had no nav aids whatsoever. The only thing we used
was a map, and I learned to navigate all over China
and Burma and India by nothing in the world was
flying the contours of the mountains. The first
time I ever flew over the hump was a P-40 with no
contacts, I mean no nav aids. The first time you
flew what? Over the hump. Oh, okay, over the hump.
Actually, the first time I ever flew over the hump
was in a P-43 later on, which I was India into China.
But you might call this a partial flight over the
southern part of the hump, because we did fly up by
way of Lashio, which is just south of the Chinese
Burma border, then almost due east to Kunming. So
you do fly over the southern part of the hump, and
it's just a forbidding area, no roads, no nothing,
except you see the Burma, the Burma Road being
built along the mountain to supply into China,
southern China, because the Japanese blocked off
the rest. Now that's where all the elite support
was to go to China, that Burma Road. And that's what
we were supposed to protect. Instead, that was
supposed to be the mission of the American
Volunteer Group, protect the Burma Road from the
Chinese. I mean from the Japanese attack. Now,
what were your feelings when you knew that you were
now finally en route to combat? Just sheer
excitement and eagerness. I was ready and hot to
try. I just couldn't wait. How about the
excitement of your other 68 colleagues? No, not
68. Because a third of them went down south. Oh,
they were. Did you have about 40 that went up with
you? Yeah, about two-thirds of us went up. They did
about three waves. The happier ones were the ones
that went to Rangoon because they figured they
were going to get to combat before we would. And
they were much more excited. It so turned out that
we, who went to Kunming, actually got the first
take to combat. But within a few days, they at
Rangoon really got involved in combat. As a matter
of fact, it was the 24th of May. 23rd, 24th, just for
Christmas. They really got tangled up, and from
then on, it was every day that way. But you were
excited. Oh,
all of us were. We felt we were trained. We were
confident.
I felt like a highly trained, hot-to-trot,
typical American Air Force fighter wing pilot.
fight upon it. We were confident. We just couldn't
wait to get in the fight, and particularly since,
you know, they hit Pearl Harbor. Oh man, you know,
we were fired up. And to me, a Jap was a savage, and
there was only one way. Kidding. We were ready.
Really excited. So, we just couldn't wait. And
every minute that particularly when we get the
Jimba, which is a Chinese air raid one, Jimba, air
raid, which scrambled. Boy, I tell you, it was, you
found yourself breathing hard. Okay, so you went
up and you landed. What were the conditions when
you landed at Kunming? I've seen some of the old
pictures. There's an old one. Some old films that
someone took right on the scene. Yeah, I can show
you plenty of them. What were the conditions like
at this era? The field at Kunming was a grass field,
but it was a good 5,000 feet square, plus down one
side of it, the eastern side of it, the Chinese
coolies were building this huge, long, 5,000
foot, about 300 foot wide runway in anticipation
of bombers, you know, every bomber from the United
States. And that just showed you how plans had been
made. And it was a typical- Was that a stone runway?
A typical Chinese construction, little broken up
rocks by a Chinaman with a hammer. carried in
baskets and dumped, and then following him was
another guy with some pots with sloppy mud to pour
on top of it, red clay. It would get hard. It'd be
just, if you will, sort of a concrete mixture, and
it made a stone runway, and it was about two feet
thick. And that would hold a B-17 easy. As a matter
of fact, B-17s and B-24s used that very well. They
were building it then. We didn't use it. We used the
grass off the side. They had our dormitories were
just spotless. Each pilot had his own bunk. Just a
little dormitory room, you know. But common.
Everybody had their own little room? Everybody.
By how large? My room was a little bit bigger than
this. 12 by 12? Yeah, I'd say 12 by 12. I forget.
Actually I'd say it was about nine by twelve. It was
a cot, regular army type cot with a good mattress on
it. Heated particularly at night in the coldest
time. Well in the morning a little cooler, you'd
come in about six o'clock with a charcoal brazier.
That was heater room in the cold. We had lights. and
common latrine facilities down the way. We had a
common dining hall and a club, if you will, where
the men and the officers, so-called officers and
men, we had no real separation over there. This was
some regulations and rules, very few, only an
absolute medal had been put out by Chenault. I was a
little bit surprised and wondering for a while how
this thing was going to operate because there was
no rules and regulations involved. You know,
strictly military discipline then. And I was just
wondering, and knowing what, having heard of
mercenary outfits, I wondered, you know, maybe
this is what this was. But it proved later on to me
that we, in my opinion, the American Volunteer
Group was not a mercenary outfit per se, I assure
you. We were a well-trained, close-knit,
extremely competent fighter group. What was the
difference between a professional fighter group
and a mercenary?
The difference was ours was an outfit that held
together and proved itself in combat. A mercenary
outfit was from, if you will, civilian type
commercial pilots, maybe one or two dishonorably
discharged military type, maybe from Poland,
Canada, one or two from the United States, even
some Russian pilots with some beat up equipment,
maybe some Chinese, I mean some Russian
equipment, that just didn't hold together. We
were a And like I told you recently, we were picked
for the cream of the crop of the trained guys. How
would you like to be, I put your question, how would
you like to be a commander? You can't ask me a
question. That's not fair. But I'm doing this
rhetorically. And I'm a commander type of one. And
I look back upon this. Here we are. Here is
Chenault, the commander. And he just reaches out
and picks trains very capably trained
people for an air force. And then gives them an
airplane, and he got made. Really, you would ask me
about training a while ago? We didn't have a hell of
a lot of training. We just indoctrinated each
other. And then the problem was, of course,
holding each other together. Well, and I
actually- So that's the difference between
mercenaries and- Okay, so you were really a
well-trained group of professionals with
outstanding equipment? To be the Chinese Air
Force. Okay, okay. Now let's go back here. I want to
ask you one question. We were talking about
conditions, and you described your room. How
about your food? The food,
well, the food was good. As a matter of fact, it was
American food, American-style food. Eggs, oh,
eggs. We had, every once in a while they had fresh
beef. And vegetables, you know, China, the
Chinese have terrific vegetables. But chicken,
they've got sick chicken in the line. We'd eat
chicken morning, noon, and night. A lot of times I
had fried chicken for breakfast. Really? Dude
chicken. This was later on when it got a little bit
difficult to get, during the war, got a little
difficult to get other types of food. But
generally speaking, the food was good, adequate.
It was very good and adequate down in Burma. Well,
what about... how you ate compared to how the
average Kool-Aid or the average person ate? Oh, no
comparison. We ate like, well we ate, actually,
I'd say we probably ate better than the average, I
know we did, we ate better than the average United
States serviceman, let's say that rushed over to
India or to Southwest Asia. We ate better. Because
it was an established mass upon the Chinese
logistic structure. They were already in place.
And Len Leith was already shipping food over
there. How'd you get along with your coolie? Did
you have servants? Well, we had common servants.
For instance, my little barber cut my hair for two
cents. and we had to speak broken immediately we
started you know broken Chinese and they'd pick up
broken English we'd pick up broken Chinese and the
cootie that would come in with my brazier in the
morning he wouldn't even wake me up he'd just come
in get the pot go out get the charcoal going and
bring it back in and leave maybe I'd see him in the
afternoon clean up the room we'd have paid them a
cent the place was kept immaculate and laundry
was, you know, you've always heard of Chinese
laundromat. They did that every day, and we just,
they'd pick it up. It was, in effect, we had
homemade maids, and
they provided the KP's for cooking. The grounds
was kept neat, and the The structures were well
built, plaster and- Did they serve you plaster and
brick? Plaster, but adobe brick. Did the Chinese
serve you when you ate dinner? Yes. Did they cook
the food? They cooked the food and served it at the
table just like an officer's club. As a matter of
fact, we'd have a choice of menu of maybe two or
three. Like in the morning we'd have eggs any
style. Every once in a while they'd have a bacon
that was sort of a local style bacon, but it tasted
like bacon. Eventually we got American food and
had American bacon. At lunch we'd have soup,
always have soup. Sometimes have soup breakfast
if you wanted to.
Yeah, we got milk. I don't know where it came from,
but at times we got milk and it was good.
In between missions, did you ever have any time
off, or was there a town nearby or anything? Yes,
yes. And did you go into that town? How were you
treated by the people? Yeah, we were in a town in the
city of Kunming. Now Kunming, area-wise, is about
the size of, let's say,
geographic-wise and area-wise, say the size of
Austin. But when I was there in the early part of the
war, when some refugees had come into it, the
population was about 400,000. We'd go into town,
see we'd have regular training days, and about
once a week we'd have a day off. had a few old jalopy
type sedans that was at our disposal, and viewers
would get together, go into town, and they had a
theater with printed American, English
subtitles, and very nice restaurants, some very
nice restaurants, and other parts of the city of
course over typical Far Eastern just pitifully
poverty-stricken and bedraggled
Chinese with eating on the sidewalk and streets
were filthy, typical for East Sloan. And we'd buy
maybe some satin coverlets to send home that you
put over a, make a quilt with. Sure. Real satin,
beautiful thing. with cars with sewn embroidered
Chinese dragons on it. As a matter of fact, sent a
lot of those. Pillowcases and things like that?
Yeah. But other than that. Well, how'd you get
along with the people when you went in? Our
relations with the Chinese people were
practically nil. Naturally, you know, driving in
town, we had. A tragic time. Oh, yeah. And of
course, driving down the street was the hardest
thing in the world to get them out of your way. We
continued on the horn. There were practically no
vehicles in the city at all. Bicycles up to the zoo,
but people mostly on foot.
They knew who we were. The people really who minded
to running the business of the city and the higher
levels of Chinese population, they knew who we
were and knew what our purpose was, and they loved
us.
The social stories were given by the governor, the
mayor, some of the wealthier citizens, and some of
us were invited for dinners. We didn't
necessarily have to eat with chopsticks.
We had our own, in effect, PX, if you will. It was
small, as it was, but in a liquor store. To buy a
bottle of liquor, I remember on Christmas Day in
Chungking,
yeah, no, Christmas Day in Kunming, I and two
others paid $52 a barrel
You were thirsty.
That was George Burgoyne and Jim Costner again,
the two I told you about. All three of us got in the
same
squadron. But every once in a while, the British
would come in with a supply of liquor. And they were
practically giving us for nothing, a ration. We
lived comfortably. We had plenty of black
clothing. And uniforms, there was no... What
uniforms we... Well, we're going to get to
uniforms and regulations. But before we do, when
you went into town, did the people treat you well
because they thought that you were there to defend
them? Or how did they treat you? Well, our
relations with the Chinese civilians, if you
will, in town were, like I say, practically
nailed. If we'd go into a store to buy something,
communication-wise, English and Chinese, you
know, we couldn't speak. Every once in a while,
you'd run across one who would interpret, could
speak a few words. But we'd haggle on prices, and
generally they would give, just because of their
respect for us, and they'd give us a terrific
discount on something you would buy, for
instance. Always gay and laughing, because they
were happy, you know, these American heroes would
come into my place and finish them. We were heroes
to them, and particularly after we started
shooting from our plant down. Now we became
widespread heroes. Like Madam said, we were her
little angels.
They treated us well. I don't remember ever, ever
any group, even when they're getting in maybe a
drunken, two or three of them getting in a drunken
riot, maybe in a local restaurant, never really
any trouble coming from them.
Whenever we'd go to a social gathering, it was
similar to, let's say, one right here in the United
States. It was just as nice a host and courteous and
extremely happy to have us as guests.
Some of them would, at times, we'd have an affair
out at the base.